---
layout: post
title: "Why having a purpose will serve your tech venture greatly."
tagline: understanding why you do what you do, has tremendous impact and will serve you throughout your entire venture
category:
tags: ["for-good", "business", "business model", "startup", "lean startup", "tech creationist canvas", "tech ventures"]
image: "/assets/content/posts/2014-09-01-runner.jpg"
---
{% include JB/setup %}


There is a huge difference between the purpose of a tech venture and any additional value it might deliver. It is important to understand that difference and not mix them up: **_Added value_ describes what you do, while the purpose tells us _why_ you do it**. Though they clearly interact and influence each other, purpose is much more than just the starting point to derive the added value from. Purpose serves you in many other ways. Getting straight early on *why* you started that tech venture will help you in short, mid and long term in various ways.

Unlike the added value, the purpose helps you directly in communicating. Not only by stating _who you want to talk_ to in the first place, but also because ["People don't buy what you do; **they buy why you do it**."](http://www.ted.com/talks/simon_sinek_how_great_leaders_inspire_action) – as Simon Sinek put it so eloquently. This doesn't only apply to customers, but also to partners (in and outside your tech venture), employees, supporters, the community and the people in general. Ever heard people saying good communication is telling a story? How is **why you do what you do as a starting point of a story**?

Having a purpose also makes it much easier to go out and communicate in the first place. From personal experience, I know how hard it is to "sell" something you are barely in line with if it But for ventures that serve a higher purpose – like OpenTechSchool or Hackership – I am happy to talk to anyone about it. As I believe in what we do and I think so should everybody else.

Your purpose will also **keep you motivated and on the right track**. As a tech venture building clean water supply systems for the kids in poorer countries, there is no good reason to sign a marketing deal with coca cola unless it also has a significant impact for the kids. On top, there will be plenty of times when **things get tough** – because of people, because of time, because of money. If you were just in it for the money, you'd find something better paid and quit. But serving a higher though, you will continue – even if it's only on your spare time – and you will get through it.

**Your purpose is single most important driving force behind what you do**. You will need it. Much more than anything else.

This is why the [Tech Creationist Canvas](/2014/08/19/introducing-the-tech-creationist-canvas) is modelled [with purpose at its core](/2014/08/19/tech-creationist-canvas-the-principles).


---

A shout out for Magdalena Roeseler for this amazing pick of a runner she took earlier this year. And a thanks for [sharing it under CC-By-2.0 with us](https://www.flickr.com/photos/magdalenaroeseler/14167150000). Highly appreciated!
