Technology is pushing the boundaries of what is possible once again. And once more it raises the questions of decent behaviour and morales around themselves. With collecting data in quantities bigger than ever before, big data is moving out of the internal accounting systems of telecommuncation providers and into the science. The latest gadgets in wearable and the quantified self movement being only the sparrow of what it is going to come next. But with the collection of all this data, we are facing the question of how we want to handle this data. As an OpenSource evangelist and believer in open science, I do think the more transparent and open the data is, the better – for society in general. But can we haven open data that respects privacy?

By definition a major analytics we gain from massive amounts of data is based on pattern matching. When it means when we say big data prediction systems, ar sophisticated mathematical models and algorithms giving you a predictable output for a given input. The idea is, the more data you have the finer you can tune it and the closer it comes to the actual outcome. And if you combine this with a feedback-loop, the iteration of those processes can be very fast. Weather forecast is still one of the most known and best documented concepts of big data. But as this analytics is based on pattern matching it also means it is highly based on profiling.

And while weather forecast information is non-invasive, how often you go to the doctor very much is. Every piece of information you collect about an individual is privacy relevant. So unless you totally anonymous each data packet, privacy will be invaded. But if you take each data point and anonymise it to keep it of the possibility of profiling, can you gain any useful insight about the data? You need a certain degree of profile-information, otherwise you can't even find out how often a given individual is going to the doctor at all. If you only keep count of how often the doctor is visited, it will only reveal that exact information: a count of visits. But big data is based on the premise to offer more insight. Raising the question, how we want to handle this.

How much information do we need to store about an individual? How much information is too much? How much is too little to analyze? Right now big companies like Facebook and Google are tracking everything they can. But this missing transparency of information they have about each individual becomes scary. More and more often, supposedly great features based on what these companies know about the individual do feel creepy to the user rather than useful. And as an engineer I can see that there will be more of that before it will backfire unless we take into account, how the individual feels about this.  