---
layout: post
title: "Production is Research"
description: ""
tags: ["production", "thoughts", "lean"]
---
{% include JB/setup %}
I am a man of principle. And I am very proud of it. But from time to time one has to rethink ones principles and rules of behaviors. The world changes and so do we, as humans and as society. And what we might considered a great principle at some point, turned out to be stupid or was circumstantial to an extend we didn't understand at the time. But when you stick to principles and rules solely based on the past this is called tradition and though might feel nice because it is familiar, might also not be appropriate at the time any longer. Like fighting fair because it is for a good cause.

This thought first came to mind when I saw this great [TED talk about paying salaries in profit vs non-profit by X], striking the question: yes, why does one have to decide to get paid good or do good? That so doesn't make any sense. It should be the opposite actually, one should be paid better when doing good instead of bad. But with profit-driven capitalism ruling the world with an iron fist, it is those who gain the most profit from ones work, who pay the best. And the non-profit or for-good entities are always kept behind for the sole purpose that the profit-makers have the better people. But shouldn't we actually assign our best engineers to fix infrastructure in the under-developed world? Or find a bearable solution for energy sources for the world? 

A recent conversation then broadened the topic even wider for me. Salaries are only one of the aspect where the for-good are handicapping themselves. What about communication techniques to get more people to join the cause? It isn't as if these techniques aren't known, they are studied and even strongly used - by profit-oriented companies. How come it's okay when they do it, but it is morally shady if a for-good entities does it? Why do we accept it that toy companies pay whole series of product placement to be broadcasted to our kids but when a teacher uses subtle technique to get kids to read books it is considered brain washing? What kind of twist standards does one have, when they believe using the shady method is okay, as long as the one using them makes a profit off it but it isn't if they don't. 

If for-profit decides to take off the bandages, why do we require for-good to leave them one. We basically require them to put themselves into the disadvantage position and lose the actual fight to stay the "moral winner". But what does it help one to be the moral winner, if instead of 10k kids you could have educated ten times as many but not be the moral winner? Or, actually, wouldn't you be the actual moral winner? We should stop judge for-good by our moral standards and start focusing on the actual impact. And if that requires them to use the tools as a for-profit, so be it. If anything we should have higher standard on those that don't even do good. 