---
layout: post
title: "If the AirBnB model is so easy, why doesn't everyone have it implemented yet?"
description: ""
tags: ["airbnb", "thoughts", "lean"]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Of all the famous business model none is as much in fashion as the AirBnB Marketplace idea, just transfered over to X. Where X is any market one could image, you actually won't believe what I got approached with. And time over time I repeat myself, explaining that I don't believe that this model is so easily transferable to other markets as they believe. After all, if it was the case, why aren't there more of this model applied to other markets and of a similar size as AirBnB is? It's not as if this was a particular new model. And I also don't believe it is solely because it got executed better, the market the founders picked - whether coincidentally or on purpose - has a few key characteristics, which make this business model more successful. In particular I believe the following to be of high importance:

1. **The market was already existing but still unable to satisfy demand**. If you are building a new company getting word out about you is already hard enough. But also having to explain the whole a total new line of business, either a new market or a business model, makes it a magnitude harder. AirBnB settled on a proven business model on an existing market with existing procedures and just made all of that better. People already knew the concept of renting an apartment for holidays, they already did this over the Internet and they knew how it works and they were demanding it. You only needed to mention the platform, no need to explain the business model. Unlike, let's say, a platform for trading cargo storage in empty trucks.

2. **Supply might be local but demand is global**. We all love the network effect, when every new entry doesn't only make the product better by being there but for the whole network. AirBnB is in market where this effect at least half-way still applies if run properly: though one could argue the supply is highly local, the value every added venue brings is great for the overall platform. This is often misunderstood, but highly important. Just think of the very slight difference of moving the model to permanent renting and your demand becomes totally local. For me wanting a permanent rental in Berlin it doesn't matter at all that you added another flat in Vienna. But on AirBnB it matters to me. For the same reason AirBnB doesn't actually need to be big in every city to be able to supply demand and still make good money there.

3. **It's a market of long-lasting goods and demand**. I already mentioned it in the point before by making the distinction between AirBnB flats and permanent rental: once a transaction is done for a permanent rental is done, it is gone from the network, while in AirBnB the supply stays and can and does have multiple transactions. It gets even more clear if you look at the -- often tried but never fully working -- example of micro-service marketplaces. In contrast to AirBnB time is of the essence here and demand and supply are short-lasting: If I want a sixpack of beers at three at night, there most likely is no one servicing it for me. And by the time there is, in the next morning, I most likely already took care of it myself or simply don't require the service no longer. Either way it results in remove of the demand from the platform. And though booking a vacation apartment is also of a timed nature, I don't need an answer _now_ to have value. Supply is long-term and so is demand. The request doesn't dry out in minutes but stays for days and weeks to come.

4. *It is a high volume, high margin all-professional-levels market place*. Vacation rental is a funny market: though the market itself has a high volume, the margin per transaction is quite high. This allows for all types of market players: from armature-I-need-a-few-bucks renting their spare room, over semi-professional seniors renting out a few apartments, to professionally run apartment agency. And as an international platform, you can easily make offers to all of them -- features allowing semi- and armature to gain professionalism and market reach for professionals -- making it clear to all of them, why they want to pay a nice part of their fee to AirBnB. But as it is high margin and AirBnB works on commission, it doesn't hurt as much, allowing AirBnB to become cash-positive quite quickly.

I believe those factors are key to the success of the AirBnB model. And though the AirBnB model sounds easy to execute, it gets much harder for any of those characteristics missing in your target market. If you need to invent the market, if the supply or demand vanishes very quickly, if the goods or services are very local, all these factors make it much harder.



