---
layout: post
title: "Introducing: the Tech Creationist's Canvas"
description: ""
tags: ["create build execute", "tech creationists canvas", "business model canvas", "cbe", "lean startup canvas"]
---
{% include JB/setup %}


I am a sucker for the Lean Startup Canvas. While business plans generally suck, I do see the purpose of structuring your thoughts and evaluating the risks of what you are about to do. But as much as I love the Canvas, as much do I hate it. Because there are too many cases it simply is insufficient, to not say completely fails. Social ventures for example. Community and Open-Source Projects. Try describing a Project like Firefox or OpenTechSchool with the Canvas and you immediately know what I mean: even if you can fill out all the fields – even though they don't make much sense necessarily – looking at it after you'll see that it doesn't really capture the project.

That is an experience I had and have over and over with tech products and community projects. **When it doesn't originated from a Business angle, the Lean Startup Canvas sucks in describing your project (idea)**. But in a world, where a programmer doesn't have to worry about paying the bills, most of tech projects are done for other reasons and originate from other sources. Not only in a few cases, genius ideas are developed as a side project because someone wanted to scratch an itch or that is was a fun idea to pursue or because of the positive impact it could have for others. But when it comes to making those ideas sustain, last and eventually blossom, we techies really suck. It simply isn't true that a great idea will just blossom and eventually everyone will use it. It takes time and effort to get people to even know what you are up.



From early on in my startup endeavours, I've been a sucker for the [Lean Startup Canvas]. As an evolution of the Business Model Canvas this one-paper acts as a business plan replacement and quick evaluation tool for business endeavours, helping you to structure the concept, uncover hidden risks and highlight problems to tackle. I've used it on various occasions, when mentoring for StartupLive, advising startups in Berlin or simply to evaluate my own business ideas. It has served me highly. That said, it also failed me miserably in the past.

Like when I tried to fit OpenTechSchool into it. Or later when evaluating the risks and ideas behind Hackership. But also on many other occasions, the Lean Startup Canvas, wasn't able to capture the picture I was trying to draw. It is especially bad, when we are talking about any kind of community or open(-source) driven project. Often it resulted in me writing more documents on top, like spreadsheets and alike and it took me a while before I realised what was the problem with it. As I highlighted the other day, I think there is a fundamental problem between business and openness and the way we describe community work vs. profitable businesses. In the lean canvas, this manifests in two important parts: the competitive advantage and the USP.

When we talk about building a new OpenSource Project or distributed community, the idea of trying to find a competitive advantage is bogus. And figuring out your unique value most of the time is about making the company the very bus-factor we are supposed to avoid internally when building businesses. The idea of building a company to make it irreplaceable stems from the sole purpose of driving it into monopoly to dictate prices and eventually increase profit without any added value. I think this is a model from the past. And the reason, why so many techies – especially from open-source and the hacker-community – despise business that much. Spending every awake minute trying to build distributed systems that don't fail even if a bigger part knocks itself out, classic business demands us to build a dead-man-switch, triggering as soon as the company is under threat. Args.

Another problem I keep facing when trying to use the Lean Startup Canvas is that the Bottom-Line idea barely covers the structure of open source and hacker projects. For once, I keep writing "initial build" in the left area, on the second, it is solely about money though the highest investment in tech is often time and last but not least. When thinking in tech projects, there is always a initial building and experimentation phase long before there is a phase in which marketing aspects are of any importance. This is the same for Firefox (which was an internal experiment) as it is for GMail or Discourse. A lot of projects never make it out of this phase. Only when they do, can they deliver impact – but only if the appropriate marketing and measures are taken.

I kept repeating to startups all the time, that it doesn't need a business person until a year in. The first year – the build – there is literally nothing for them to do aside from running around announcing they had a startup. Only after the first build is done, the experiments actually works and the product is able to handle clients, is when marketing is wanted – and needed actually. And that is only one aspect of many that differ between building and what I call "executing" – marketing, maintaining, continuously developing. This split is missing in the Lean Startup Canvas. Making it a tool that only covers projects that don't have the build phase and are pretty much useless for techies thinking of starting their project.

At the same time, the building time is the most fun part. And techies don't only forget to think about that second part, they often lack the courage to admit their project is ready to take customers. Also because it means either taking in a business person, who – supposedly – ruins their idea to make it "market-fit" or taking care of these boring things yourself.



When I wrote the article, asking about successful OpenSource-Business the other day, I soon after announced I'd try to profile a few of them. As usual I went back to my Lean Startup Canvas as a first approach to capture their way of doing business. And once more it failed me. The same goes for a post-mortem-analysis on OpenSSL, I had in the back of my head for a while. It required a new model. An evolution of 