
I was coding rather bad than good since I was about fourteen. That was at a time without any Udacity or codeschool – I learned from books. School and later University didn't offer much to help me, aside from a few specific teachers, who quickly ran out of homework to give me. During my civil service I realised I didn't have a problem with school but that I was more of a hands-on-learning kinda guy and the theoretical approach of institutional learning had failed me miserably. Lucky for me I found a job as a programmer at a small startup in Barcelona through my open source contributions to their platform. There Fortuna gave me a mentor, who wasn't only a great hacker himself but was also willing to coach me. Over the next one and half years I learned to code, inside-out and into depth. I always say, I went to Barcelona to get trained in proper English and learn to code. 


One and a half years. For someone, who had already some prior experience, was dedicated to learn it, super hard to discourage with a high threshold for disappointments - to a point of utter stubbornness. These are traits many skilled programmers and hackers share. Because learning to code is hard. It takes time. There is little help if any at all. For most of it, it is a very lonely ride. But it doesn't have to be. Sure, it will always take time, but we can make it more efficient. And we can make it more social and fun – we can make it less hard. And we know how. With OpenTechSchool early 2013 we started continuous learning groups, which meet after work-hours helping beginners but also more advanced learners get further with their learning projects. And for more experienced developers, we very recently finished an experimental full-time programme called Hackership (read all about it here). Both focused on long-term life-long continuous learning in social, supportive and welcoming environments.


When we started OpenTechSchool in April last year, the main idea was to replicate the very well working code-learning workshops of RailsGirls and RailsBridge and extend their focus to other subjects and fields but also include other groups of people. The success of these first workshops proved us right in doing so. Even when starting we knew that even a full-weekend workshop surely isn't enough to learn to code. It takes more than an hour, a day, a weekend or a week to learn to code. So, what shall we do about this?